---
title: 'Abdullah Öcalan: A Real World Experiment in Equality and Radical Democracy'
date: 2020-06-29T09:09:13.000+00:00
related_posts: []
sub_heading: ''
tags:
- democracy
- " feminism"
banner_image: "/uploads/2020/06/12/kurdistan_creative_commons.jpg"
layout: post

---
_by Alex Lee_

## Highlighting Non-White, Non-Western Voices in Academia

As everyone is aware by now, the police murder of George Floyd led to an outpouring of anger towards daily violence towards black people and ethnic minorities and about the racist structures across society. Black Lives Matter protests have gone global and the toppling of the statue of Edward Colston, whose only claim to fame was enslaving and killing tens of thousands of black people,  has shone a vital spotlight on the horrific and brutal history of British colonialism, a history that many people in this country are never taught about. Education systems across the UK pay little attention to crimes of the British Empire, and non-Western authors who criticise privileged white ideas are given little attention and often excluded from mainstream journals for being too critical.

Education in the UK is guilty of white-washing the teaching of history, ignoring crimes by the British, being silent on the history of minority groups, and implicitly teaching people that white British people are superior. This is why post-graduate researchers in SASS have been talking about ways to respond, and one of these ways is to support the ["decolonise the curriculum"]() campaign by featuring different authors that we want to highlight.

Many ideas and viewpoints in academia are based on assumptions of European dominance. Ignoring this results in continued domination and injustice. It is the duty of white men like myself to recognise our privilege.

## Abdullah Öcalan

I have only recently come across Abdullah Öcalan. I had heard his name before in relation to the Kurdish struggle before but I knew little about him. I knew vaguely that the Kurdish people have been experimenting with new forms of direct democracy, and havalso been fighting amazingly successfully against ISIS. I also was aware that women fighters were a core part of their revolutionary army. So a couple of weeks ago I bought a book by Öcalan - [The Political Thought of Abdullah Öcalan: Kuridstan, Woman’s Revolution and Democratic Confederalism](). This blog post is summarising the ideas in this because I wanted to know more about his ideas that are central to the Kurdish revolution. However, just reading the foreword by Nadje Ali-Ali convinced me that this book may be very useful to my PhD. In many countries in the world, democracies are breaking down and people are looking to strong-man racist and authoritarian leaders for answers. And yet in the Middle East, an area that is usually dismissed by arrogant Western academics, there is a real-world experiment in a new type of direct democracy. Amazingly, this is happening while under attack by Turkey and ISIS (and others) while putting women’s empowerment and equality at the center of this revolution, saying "a country can't be free unless the women are free". Öcalan, one of the founding members of the PKK (Kurdistan Workers Party) is one the most well-known and influential people in the revolution.  However, the majority of this revolution has occurred while Öcalan has been imprisoned by Turkey’s warmongering leader, Erdogan. During his time in the Imrali prison on an island in the Marmara Sea, from 1999 to today, and 18 years of which were in solitary confinement, he has remained active and has written a number of books outlining the way forward for Kurdistan. In my research I plan to look at democracy in relation to conservation projects. Given the failures and disenchantment with democracy in the West, I will refer to this real-world radical democratic project in my research, as it shows that democracy can work and empower people if implemented on a local scale. His ideas about democracy and states I would have probably considered impractical and too idealistic before reading, but the fact that this is actually being done in the real world, in extremely difficult conditions, is undeniable, and requires our attention.

_You can sign the petition to free him on the Freedom for Öcalan site at_ [_https://www.freedomforocalan.org/sign-our-petition/_](https://www.freedomforocalan.org/sign-our-petition/ "https://www.freedomforocalan.org/sign-our-petition/")_._

## Feminist Revolution

One way that Western authors dismiss the Middle East is by pointing to the treatment of women, and at the same time, implying that white Western countries are clearly superior because women have equal rights. This is not only a racist argument, but shows ignorance about the sexism in Western countries too. The rise of politicians like Trump shows the deep roots of misogyny in Western countries, but there's also still a huge difference in working conditions and pay with [poorer women of colour particularly suffering](https://www.versobooks.com/blogs/3949-a-reignited-spirit-black-women-s-lives-in-britain). Even in for wealthier highly skilled workplaces, women are harassed and marginalised - demonstrated for example by [the treatment of women ]()in Silicon Valley. Although women have the vote and are considered in law as equals, the systems themselves are structurally misogynist. While liberal values have done a lot for women, freedom for women cannot occur until misogynist structures are abolished too.  Legal rights to equality for women will not solve the massive structural and ideological sexism in the West.

This kind of radical structural revolution is fundamental to Öcalan's politics. He suggests that the collapse of society began thousands of years ago, when women, who culturally had been in roles of caring and supporting communities,  originally had far more power than men over society. Men, who had generally been more engaged in hunting and religion, decided that they could take more power and control. This led to a long and slow erosion of women's power, using religious ideas about women's inherent weakness and supported by violence. This, he argues, was the fundamental rupture of society from a sustainable and egalitarian society. Most forms of domination we see today have their origin in this rupture. He connects this to a resolution in his vision of socialism, saying "to kill the dominant man is the fundamental principal of socialism", and argues that previous real-life examples of socialism failed because of a lack of focus on women. An assumption that a revolution can be won by men and _then_ we can resolve women's emancipation is impossible, Öcalan says. On the contrary, women's emancipation must happen _during_ the revolution otherwise it will simply create more domination, since this initial rupture will not have been resolved.

The reality of women's lives in Kurdistan is complex. Many men, in spite of their admiration for Öcalan, do not want to give up their power. This is changing as more women become more involved in different types of work, being organised in their demands for political change, and famously, being at the front-line of the war and especially feared by ISIS. More needs to be done, but Öcalan's call to put women at the forefront of the revolution appears to be transforming Kurdistan's society gradually.

## Democratic Revolution

Democracy in Kurdistan is threatened by conflicts on many sides, particularly by an authoritarian Turkish government, and the fact that Kurdish people are spread across Turkey, Iraq, Iran and Syria makes it extremely hard for Kurdish democracy to function. Many Kurdish people have been fighting for an independent state as a core requirement of establishing democracy. However, Öcalan's vision of democracy rejects this. His analysis is that creating an independent state would only lead to more domination, because states inherently centralise power to a few people. States set out laws and rules, forcing everyone to comply and submit to powerful bureaucratic structures. States create fixed borders, categorising land as "ours" or "theirs", and declaring people as "citizens" who meet certain conditions. People defined as "non-citizens" have little power and are excluded from many parts of state systems. Homogeneity is imposed due to a centralised structure. His vision of democracy is called democratic confederalism, which he calls a "non-state political administration", a "flexible, multicultural, anti-monopolistic and consensus-oriented" structure. Democratic governance is done by clusters of councils that are multi-structured, striving for unity in diversity.

## Rejecting Nationalism

The lack of democracy in the Middle East is another reason why Western academics like to dismiss and belittle the region. Again, many of these arguments have unspoken assumptions of white superiority. Looking more closely at the region, the failures in democracy in the region often are enabled and supported by huge support from Western counties. The founding of the USA was built upon the enslavement of black people, and the money pouring into Europe from slavery supported the creation of modern states. The documentary _Bitter Lake_ by Adam Curtis is an excellent investigation into how the USA was fundamental in creating the repressive regime in Saudi Arabia for regional power and access to oil. Massive military backing is provided to Egypt too, which cracks down on democracy, while the Western interventions in Afghanistan and Iran overturned democracy to put in place more obedient and repressive governments. And of course, Israel is hugely backed by the West, and is a country that denies Palestinians basic human rights, and has continually boxed Palestinians into smaller and smaller spaces since the creation of Israel. Even while Western democracy appeared to be working, Western countries were destroying democracy over the rest of the world. The parceling up of many other pieces of land across the world was forced upon people by the Western colonial masters, who often drew arbitrary lines on a map for borders. In Kurdistan's case, this act by the West left a people without a country to call their own and condemned them to brutality by other states.

Controversially for many Kurdish nationalists, Öcalan says that Kurds must seek freedom _within_ existing countries. Demands for independence must focus on Kurdish people's right to self-determination and democracy inside the countries that already exist. IIn the long-term, this will demonstrate that states are not necessary and enable countries around the world to see an alternative way to govern that does not require domination and exploitation. The creation of a state will not provide freedom, just new types of repression. Instead, a few people will benefit, and  Kurds will still suffer from domination and control. States, by necessity, are not democratic and can never provide freedom.

Öcalan says instead that real democracy must reject the state and embrace a looser structure where local communities, groups, cities and regions have control over all laws and decisions. The structure is able to provide autonomy to people within these different levels, where imposition is replaced by deliberation by people. The state is not freedom, it is domination, and is a logical extension of notions of masculine dominance. This is why a feminist revolution is essential to real democracy, because it unpicks deep roots of misogynistic dominance across institutions and cultures that expects powerful individuals to lead us through systems of dominance and centralised control. Erdogan, the authoritarian and warmongering leader of Turkey, still uses propaganda to say the Kurdish people are trying to break up Turkey, which is entirely untrue, they are demanding autonomy and democracy within Turkey.

The current situation in Kurdistan is worrying. Under the COVID-19 outbreak, [Erdogan is attacking the Kurdish people]() while [European leaders and the media are distracted by the pandemic](). It is unclear if the Kurdish people can defend themselves against the huge military power of Turkey no matter how brave their fighters may be.

_If you want to take action then you can do so by reading and sharing Öcalan's ideas, and also signing the petition to free him on the Freedom for Öcalan site at_ [_https://www.freedomforocalan.org/sign-our-petition/_](https://www.freedomforocalan.org/sign-our-petition/ "https://www.freedomforocalan.org/sign-our-petition/")_. You can also reference him in your work, further introducing more people to the cause of Kurdistan and his ideas for democracy and feminist revolution. You may also want to consider joining or donating to one of the Kurdistan campaigning organisations such as_ [_Kurdistan Solidarity Campaign_]() _or following them on_ [_Twitter_]()_._